The Himalayas, they're known as
the rooftop of the world.
This is the largest mountain
range on the planet.
Surrounded by peaks 7000 and
8000 meters tall, this area is
completely frozen
and inaccessible
for most of the year.
The air here is so thin that
it is hard to breathe.
This barren valley of ice hides
the beginning of the
holiest river in India.
Ancient myths describe the river
as so intensely pure
that just one drop of it's
waters cures disease
and wipes away sin.
This is because the Ganges is
not just a mere river, but one
of the most powerful Goddesses,
supernatural and
indestructible in
her greatness.
This is the story of the
millions who depend on her for
their spiritual, as well as
physical, sustenance.
The Ganges begins near India's
border with Tibet and Nepal.
From here, the river runs from
west to east, flowing more
than 2500 kilometers across
India, from the Himalayas to
the Bay of Bengal.
Ganga, as the river is called in
India, emerges from beneath
an ice glacier that has
been melting for
thousands of years.
It is necessary to get an
experienced guide to reach
Gaumukh, which is the
source of the river.
It is here at Gaumukh that you
can see the first drops of ice
become the river, Ganges.
Here in India, people believe
the Ganges is so pure that
it's impossible to pollute
her waters.
You can almost see how they
could believe this, high up in
the mountains where everything
is so clean, and people are so
rare that the animals
practically ignore you.
But the truth is, the river is
far from indestructible.
It is in grave danger.
Pollution is rapidly
killing it.
And if something is not done
very soon, it will be
destroyed by the very people
who come to worship it.
The glacier that feeds the
Ganges is quickly receding,
and no one is sure how long it
will be until it is gone.
Because the glacier is
disappearing, each year it
takes longer and longer for
pilgrims to make the trek from
the nearest village to
the river's source.
Today this trip takes about
15 hours, but this must be
divided over two days
because there are so
few hours of daylight.
India's population has
more than doubled
over the past 50 years.
And today over 1 billion people
call this country home,
from the top of the
mountains to the
city's down in the plains.
Sewage, garbage and other
pollutants are all
going into the river.
And global warming is affecting
it as well.
Nature seems to be on a race
with time as each day brings
more and more danger
to the river.
This is the village
of Gangotri.
Before the glacier started
receding, the source of the
river was located here.
The exact spot where the Goddess
was believed to have
first touched the Earth.
Ever since.
it's been a place where
Hindus come to send
prayers to the Goddess.
According to legend, Ganga was
a Goddess in heaven who came
down to earth because of the
prayers of an Indian chief
named Bhagirath.
He needed her waters to wash
away the ashes of his
ancestors in order to bring
them eternal peace.
Bhagirath prayed for so long
that the God, Brahma, took
pity on him and ordered Ganga
to come down to Earth.
In order for this powerful
Goddess not to destroy
everything in her path as she
washed down from the heavens,
the God, Shiva, absorbed Ganga
into his matted locks to
cushion the impact.
The few drops of water that
escaped and fell to Earth
became the river Ganges.
A huge rock in the middle of the
river marks the exact spot
where the Goddess is said
to have landed.
The main village temple was
built right next to it.
Gangotri is a temporary
settlement.
It was built so that pilgrims
have shelter and food when
they come to pray
to the river.
The village is cold
and isolated.
So most people only
stay a few days.
The only people who live so far
up in the mountains are
religious seekers called
sadhus or babas.
Babas are a special class of
people in India who have
renounced their lives in order
to devote their time to prayer
and meditation.
Babas are sort of like monks,
but they have no formal
hierarchies.
There are many kinds of babas,
but since there is a general
link between the river Ganges
and that God Shiva, many babas
who live along the river's
banks are his followers.
Babs are considered
completely apart
from the rest of society.
And until about 100 years ago,
they couldn't even be
prosecuted under Indian law.
Today, most babas still separate
themselves from
society, often living in caves
or tents, far away from the
rest of the world.
The peculiar aspect
of their lives, is
that babas don't work.
They're productive time is spent
meditating, and it is up
to the rest of society to
support them as their
spiritual guides.
Babas who are Shiva's followers,
use marijuana on a
religious basis because it is
said that Shiva ate hashish
cakes as a holy sacrament.
This is an acceptable practice
among Indian mystics who have
been using the plant for
religious purposes for
thousands of years.
Marijuana has been nicknamed
ganja after the river Ganges,
because it first grew here.
These babas imitate Shiva
in a lot of ways.
For example, they mat their
hair, they carry a warrior's
trident, and they go around
practically naked.
For thousands of years of Indian
history people lived in
villages, and villages
were small.
This ancient way of life is
still visible in remote
agricultural communities in
the Himalayas where people
still live on what the land
itself can provide.
One of these villages is
Gangnani, which is known
throughout the region
for its hot spring.
Gangnani has very
little contact
with the outside world.
There is no road, and the only
access is a mountain path 1/2
a kilometer up the steep
mountainside.
This is the final day of the
Durga Puja festival in
Gangani, the most important
celebration of the year.
Traditionally, all the villagers
gather together in
the middle of the village where
music and dancing idols
are used to bless the food.
Then everyone sits in a giant
circle and eats together, men
first, then women,
and children.
The most common meal is rice
and lentils, along with
whatever vegetables the
villagers can grow.
And everything is cooked
over an open fire.
Traditionally, all the food is
eaten with the hands, while
the water comes straight from
the mountain spring that flows
into the Ganges.
After the meal, it is customary
to tie a red string
around the wrist of each
participant to signify that
the prayers have
been performed.
Villagers use the river for
drinking, washing, and
irrigating their fields.
This arrangement seems idyllic
in many ways, but villagers
like this also use the river
to carry away their waste.
As times change, and villages
turn into bustling cities, you
can imagine the resulting
effect on the river.
From its source in Gaumukh and
past the holy village of
Gangotri, the Ganges turns
down the mountains past a
number of smaller towns and
villages until it reaches
Rishikesh in the foothills
of the Himalayas.
In Rishikesh, you start to get
hints of the vast population
and the faster pace of life
that exists in the plains
further south.
The horns of many cars and
rickshaws are deafening,
exhaust fills the air.
Everything is a lot dirtier than
it was further up in the
mountains, but the
river itself is
still relatively clean.
This is good for the countless,
religious retreat
centers that are popular with
the many Indians and
foreigners who end up here.
Rishikesh is also known as the
yoga capital of the world.
And every year, thousands of
yoga enthusiasts travel here
to learn from the masters.
[INTERPOSING] quite
difficult thing.
According to the yoga system
there exists secondary chakras
at the level of the joints
of the limbs.
That means, like inside in
the middle at the level--
It's a little ironic that today,
the most popular yoga
teacher in Rishikesh
is a Westerner.
Swami Vivekananda was born in
Romania and educated as an
engineer before he turned
to learning the secrets
of yoga full time.
Usually, when I talk to my
pupils about yoga, I prefer to
tell them what yoga does.
I mean, I speak about
the effects of yoga.
What can you get through
the practice of yoga?
Then it is up to you to decide
what yoga is, if it's a
philosophical system, if it's
a way of life, if it is--
I don't know what else
you can call it.
I mean, they have been given
a lot of dry or colorful
explanations.
That yoga is a path
to ecstasy.
That yoga is a path to
self realization.
That it is this and that.
But I think it is best defined
through its own actions, that
is, through what it delivers,
through what it gives to the
human beings.
Many people are familiar with
yoga as an exercise or a
relaxation technique, but this
is only part of an entire
philosophical system.
While many books have been
written on different
approaches to yoga, most masters
will tell you the
books contain only a
small portion of
the complete teaching.
There are many schools of yoga
and each teaches a different
technique or philosophy.
Yoga is an elite thing.
For the time being, yoga
is not a mass thing.
It is this thing for initiates,
for the few, chosen
disciples who get to know the
secret forces of nature.
The thing which is special in
India is not about Ganga.
The thing which is special
in India is about
people's belief or faith.
That is, the river Ganga is what
it is, because so many
millions of people so
fanatically believe in it.
And yes, there is a power of
belief, especially when it is
geared in hundreds of
millions of people.
It produces a measurable
effect.
Scientists apparently have
measured in the river Ganga
all kind of amazing things.
And it is sterile, bacteria
free in spite of all the
garbage which is dumped into it,
and all kinds of things.
That the river Ganga has some
amazing properties today,
significantly, less and less
people believe in this, and
the Ganga, at the same time,
becomes more and more normal.
It is chemically polluted and
that has nothing to do with
bacteria and germs. So, more
and more people actually
believe now, OK, Ganga, you
cannot really drink the water
from the Ganga or whatever,
because it
starts getting dangerous.
Still peasants do it big time.
It's the [UNINTELLIGIBLE], the
belief, the faith which they
have. In a climate like India,
where currents get dried up,
and water is a problem,
and some, of course--
when June when everything is
boiling, and I don't know how
many degrees under the sunshine,
Ganga's the only
place where they can go and feel
a moment of coolness in
the night and take a dip in its
clouded water and finally
get refreshed.
Without Ganga this place would
be scorched, simply.
So of course, Ganga is like the
source of life throughout
India, through the plains of
India, and wherever you go.
And without Ganga they
wouldn't exist
and they know this.
So in this way, it 's like
a kind of cult of nature.
It's like being grateful to
the forces of nature.
It is why the sacredness of
Ganga is actually hidden in
the sacredness of
the human heart.
It is the human heart
which is sacred.
And the belief, the pure belief
of so many people,
makes Ganga special.
Yoga is not the only
thing that draws
foreigners to Rishikesh.
Back in the 1960s the Beatles
came here to meditate, write
music, and relax from
the rigors of fame.
The band joined a Maharishi
Mahesh Yogi Ashram on the
banks of the Ganges.
Many of the bungalows in this
Ashram were built using the
stones found in the river bed.
And many people believe that
they are especially conducive
to deep meditation.
The Ashram was very popular at
the time, but it has since
been left in ruin.
The Beatles didn't last
long in Rishikesh.
But George Harrison did
eventually become a Hari
Krishna, and his ashes were
buried in the Ganges
when died in 2002.
[EXTENDED CHANTING/SINGING
OF "HARE KRISHNA"]
The next city along the
Ganges is Haridwar.
It's only 20 kilometers away
from Rishikesh, so to get
here, many pilgrims
travel by bus.
The ride costs under a dollar,
but this is still a lot of
money for most Indians, and
haggling over the ticket price
is quite common.
The buses are usually extremely
crowded, and almost
always play music full-blast.
Pilgrims dress in their very
best clothes, and often carry
flowers with them to use later
in prayers to the river.
Haridwar is said to be the exact
spot where the Ganges
emerges from the Himalayas and
begins its journey through the
plains of northern India.
Hindus believe that ceremonial
purity is guaranteed when a
believer bathes in one of
India's holy rivers.
And the river Ganges confers a
special purity, because it is
considered the most
holy river of all.
Haridwar is a place so popular
with Hindus for religious
observances that the local
government diverted the river
into a special canal to support
the huge number of
worshippers that gather here.
The water in the canal goes
by extremely fast, and
worshippers have to be really
careful not to be swept away
as they bathe.
The narrow banks of the
river are extremely
crowded day and night.
During the dry season, the
city's merchants gather to
sell everything from hats, to
jewelry, to chillums, which
are special pipes for smoking
tobacco and hashish.
Since space is limited indoors,
vendors cook food on
the street to sell to
restaurants and passers-by.
Flowers to use in prayers
are also for sale.
And workers turn tobacco into
traditional hand-wove bidis,
which are leaves of
tobacco rolled-up
and tied with a string.
They are small but
quite strong.
You can also find a great
variety of fruit, as well as
herbs and spices for use in
traditional medicines.
At night, the city
is transformed.
Weddings are a particularly
interesting event in India,
since each celebration
is as ostentatious as
the family can afford.
In this particular case, the
groom is covered in flowers
and carried to the ceremony in a
shiny horse driven carriage.
A band plays loudly, and people
have been hired to
accompany the wedding party
carrying special lights on
their heads.
They have to carry a generator
with them for the lights to
work, and it gets its own
special carriage.
Drums, bells and trumpets fill
the air with noise as the
groom in his shiny carriage
disappears into the night.
As darkness falls, the banks of
the river take on a whole
new look as pilgrims crowd
for evening prayers.
During prayer time, only members
of the Brahmin caste
are allowed to lead
the worshippers.
You have to be born a Brahmin,
there is no movement within
the caste system.
However, this system is dying
out, especially since the
Indian government has outlawed
discrimination based on caste.
So far as my knowledge goes,
the caste system is perhaps
very much peculiar to India,
in the sense that it is
practiced not only among the
Hindus, but it has an impact
on other religions also.
But the caste system has
influenced rather in a
negative sense these
religions also.
Actually, there is nothing
wrong with the
caste system as such.
The only evil associated with
the caste system may be the
denial of basic human rights
and fundamental freedoms to
any individual on the
basis of caste.
Fortunately, our constitution,
our law prohibits
discrimination on the
grounds of caste.
But it will take some time
before the caste system is
abolished altogether
from this land.
As the evening begins, the
Brahmins welcome the many
pilgrims who have come to
offer their prayers.
These prayers are often
accompanied with
offerings to the river.
Gifts to the Goddess
traditionally include flower
petals set on a boat of leaves,
sometimes with sweets
or incense set on top.
Fire is important as well, so
that each offering includes
the four main elements of
the Hindu world, earth,
water, air and fire.
Worshippers place these gifts
into the flowing river, often
while reciting a mantra.
A mantra is a word or syllable
chanted or silently repeated
in meditation to help clear
and focus the mind.
The word, Om, is an example
of a mantra.
Experts estimate that there
are over 400 million Gods
recognized within
the Hindu fold.
And single Gods are worshipped
in many different forms with
different names.
This myriad of Gods and beliefs
makes Hinduism unique
among the world's religions.
The prayers' of thousands of
pilgrims are carried with the
river as it travels past the
rich plains of northern India.
The city of Allahabad is located
at the delta of two
great Indian rivers, the
Ganges and the Yamuna.
Despite its size, the Ganges
doesn't have regular boat
travel, so you have to travel
by bus or train.
Allahabad itself, is a large,
dirty, overcrowded city
without much interest
to outsiders.
It is an important Hindu
pilgrimage spot, but the city
center is a good
five kilometers
away from the river.
Rickshaw is the best way to
get there, and the ride
usually takes about
45 minutes.
Once you reach the river there
is usually an upbeat
atmosphere here, with people
dancing, temples, and other
festivities a regular
part of the day.
This holy spot is called Sangha,
place where three holy
rivers are said to converge.
Where the rivers meet you can
literally see the waters
mixing, since the Ganges
is brown while
the Yamuna is green.
The third river, the Saraswathi,
is mythical, and
can be seen only by the Gods.
Pilgrims take boats to get to
the exact spot where the
rivers mix, and ritual
bathing is the main
activity of the day.
This is a beautiful spot.
But the truth is that for
several years now, scientists
have declared the Yamuna
to be a dead river.
The waste of Delhi, Agra, and
many other big cities flows
directly into the Ganges here,
at this sacred location.
As we leave our Allahabad and
travel down the river, we
reach the most fascinating and
legendary sight along the
banks of the Ganges.
The ancient city of Varanasi has
been India's religious and
cultural center for
over 3000 years.
It is situated between two
tributaries to the Ganges, the
Varuna to the north and
the Assi to the south.
As Mark Twain put it, when he
visited the city, Varanasi is
older than history, older than
tradition, even older than
myth, and looks twice as a old
as all of them put together.
It is especially important for
Hindus to bathe here in
Varanasi toward the end of
their lives, in order to
purify themselves
before they die.
The center of all this activity
is the city ghats.
Ghat is another word
for cave or pier.
In India, ghats are cement
steps that lead from the
city's edge to the river.
They allow pilgrims easy
access to the water.
There are a number of different
ghats in Varanasi.
Each is roughly a 50 meter piece
of land, sponsored by a
particular person or
religious group.
Different ghats have different
functions.
Some are used for religious
purposes, and others serve
more practical needs.
Many locals bring their work
down to the ghats, so it is
common to see people bathing,
fishing, or washing clothes.
The ghats are a popular place to
water the local buffalo, so
you can also see people
gathering buffalo dung.
Indians mix it with straw, and
then they pat it into bricks.
Once dried, these bricks are
used for cooking and heating
in the place of wood, since most
trees in India were cut
down for fuel hundreds
of years ago.
The ghats of Varanasi
are extremely
important to all Hindus.
But there are two ghats along
Varanasi's shoreline that are
very special.
Manikarnika and Harish Chandra
ghats are used exclusively for
cremating the bodies of pilgrims
who come here to die.
Legend has it that the God Shiva
is physically present at
Manikarnika ghat at all times.
That means, that if a person is
cremated here Shiva himself
takes that spirit to heaven.
This will release the person's
soul from the cycle of birth
and death and guarantee
eternal happiness.
Pilgrims from all over India
come to Varanasi toward the
ends of their lives in hopes
that Shiva will personally
guide their spirits to heaven.
If they are successful in their
quest to die here, there
is a special ritual for each
burning that takes place.
The air is filled with smoke,
but it actually doesn't smell
as bad as you would expect.
Maybe it's because of the wood
that's used, or maybe it's the
myriad of other smells around.
But the most unique part of the
cremation process involves
the babas that live here
at the cremation ghats.
These babas actually eat
the cremated bodies
on a religious basis.
Aghori babas are intimately
connected with the cremation
process that is ongoing
in Varanasi.
A aghori babas often live near
the creation fires, because
their prasad, or holy sacrament,
is the very flesh
the fires consume.
They believe that after being
touched by the holy fire, the
bodies are holy themselves, and
to eat the flesh of these
bodies makes you pure.
Boom Boom Baba is an aghori baba
that lives at the Harish
Chandra cremation ghat.
He is a well known figure
in Varanasi.
People all along the ghats fear
respect him, and come to
him for his blessing.
While his mysticism is uniquely
Indian, Boom Boom
Baba shares his teachings with
Indians and foreigners alike.
In spite of their unconventional
practices, or
perhaps because of them,
aghori babas are highly
respected within
Indian culture.
A lot of people believe that
they have a special kind of
black magic.
They often carry the ashes of
cremated bodies with them for
use in spells and ceremonies as
well as implements, such as
monkey bones or human skulls,
which they use to drink the
holy water of the Ganges.
what
In order for a Hindu soul to
attain peace, their bodies
have to be cremated
not buried.
But wood is expensive, so many
bodies do not get burned all
the way before the
wood runs out.
Also some people, like
children, do not
get burned at all.
Their bodies are considered
naturally pure, so they are
rowed out to the middle
of the river and
dumped without any burning.
These well established cultural
traditions have begun
to have a really bad effect
on the river.
The city's garbage collects
in the sacred ghats.
Untreated sewage flows directly
into the river.
Cows are considered sacred
animals in India, and they are
left to the Ganges
when they die.
The decomposed bodies of many
different animals wash up on
the city's banks.
Packs of wild dogs roam the
unpopulated stretches of the
river, scavenging
on the bodies.
Partially burned and rotting
human corpses also
pile up on the shore.
Scenes like these are common in
places like Varanasi, and
no one is particularly
offended by them.
But the people's faith in the
basic purity of the river
leads many to believe that
despite the contamination, the
river is still, essentially,
clean.
There are efforts under way to
clean the ghats at ritual
bathing spots to get rid of the
most obvious garbage, but
there's nowhere else for
the waste to go.
Because trash cans are not
widely used in India, people
through their garbage
everywhere.
And a lot of it ends
up in the river.
There are people in Varanasi who
take the time to pick up
the worst of the trash from the
shoreline, mostly a wide
variety of plastic bags, but the
idea is simply to make the
ghats look nice, not
to actually do
anything about the problem.
The garbage that's removed is
just rode over to the other
side of the river and dumped.
When the monsoon season begins,
the flood takes this
garbage and washes it downstream
to pollute the next
city downriver.
While this would be disastrous
enough in any culture, the
specific ways the Indians
interact with and depend on
the Ganges for activities such
as bathing and drinking,
literally make this
contamination life
threatening.
In Varanasi, which is located
downstream from large
industrial cities such as
Delhi and Agra, these
supposedly purifying
practices are
becoming physically dangerous.
Can the Ganges be saved?
And if so, will Indians be able
to keep bathing in it and
drinking it as they have been
for thousands of years?
Only time will tell.
For millennia, Indians were able
to throw their waste into
the river with minimal
environmental impact, because
the population remained small,
and enough air and land were
available to absorb and
disperse wastes.
But today, as the country
grows, the pollution has
gotten out of control.
As night falls on the city,
the evening puja begins.
The main ghat in Varanasi is
host to the most sacred ritual
that takes place on
the river's banks.
Pilgrims crowd the ghats as
Brahmins lead the ceremony.
Dedicated to Brahma and Shiva,
this tradition has been taking
place for thousands of years
here along the river's shores.
Soon after beginning, the
noise is deafening.
Bells, drums, and song are all
part of the ritual, but
participation, rather
than harmony is
what is most important.
Will the Ganges survive into
the next century, with luck
the Goddess will hear these
special prayers.
There's much to be done to
save the river and the
traditions that are
connected with it.
As darkness falls, the banks
of the river take
on a whole new look.
The cremation fires continue
burning into the night.
The souls of the lucky ones
who are cremated here are
purified by the Lord
Shiva, who releases
them from all sin.
The sacredness of Ganga is
actually hidden in the same
sacredness of the human heart.
It is the human heart
which is sacred.
And the belief, the pure belief
of so many people,
makes Ganga special.
In India, according to the
principle of reincarnation,
the end of one, marks the
beginning of another.
Born among the snow capped peaks
of the Himalayas, the
Ganges began as a mountain
of ice melting into
the river of water.
Now, as the Ganges comes to an
end, it joins the vast waters
of the Bay of Bengal and is
reborn as the Indian Ocean.